Who is the fastest man to have ever lived ? we all know the response. Who is the fastest man ever, now and in perpetuity till heat death of the universe ? Again, the response is known and valid for all distances, imperial and metric and for all time references. What does being fast mean ?

If you were to steal a glance at the list for senior men’s 100m record progression, the progression from to 9.84s is wholly attributed to a badman called Donovan Bailey, who had, as anyone would expect, a remarkable history. In 1992, Mr Bailey, an accountant at the time, was taken aback when he saw the Canadian Olympic Trials on TV. Bailey had every right to be shocked as he witnessed some of his old high school friends being drafted for sprint events. He did what any upright citizen would do, that is, he called and notified the authorities on exactly how he was superior, and it turned out that his lips had confessed no lies.

This was the only and last time that a civilian had spouted garbage about an elite sport, and actually delivered, with diabolic gusto. On July 27, 1996, at the Centinnel Stadium in Atlanta, Georgia, at 315m altitude with vital tailwind of +0.7m/s, Donovan Bailey ascended the throne, in the most spectacular of fashions. He was the last to leave the blocks, the fifth to reach the 50m line, acceptable feat which was clouded by the sudden complete surrender to ruthlessness that saw him cover the next 10m in at the time, the fastest ever instatanous speed ever achieved by a human, 46.7km/h, much faster than any black mamba, rhino, elephant, giraffe and most importantly, Dinofelis, a sabre-toothed cat that viewed proto-humans as a delicacy. As a sidenote, Bailey emboided the advancement in humans surpassing an animal that wrecked terror on our ancestors. That is, humans exhibited the ability to outrun Dinofelis and if anyone finds that mundane, they are reminded that, in a fair fight, humans, armed with high calibre armour-piercing degraded-uranium alloy rounds, we could still, impeed a Dinofelis from committing any feline garbage. Fun fact, Baileys parents immigrated from Jamaica to Canada when he was still irrelevant.

It also happened that Surin Burin, a Haitian who likewise immigrated to Canada in his formative years, transitioned from long jump to the dash, something only achieved by Jesse Owens, Carl Lewis and Marcell Jacobs. It was unfortunate that Surin was competing at the same time as Bailey, who was the fastest man in the world, not just Canada, but advantageous in the fact that these two already formed crucial pieces of the legendary, feared and respected Canadian 4x100m relay team that was too perfect to even describe. Surins bad luck came in for a second dance, in the form of Maurice Green, at an event in Seville, Spain, at 12 altitude and with a tailwind of +0.2m/s, where in a feat of rage, the World Record was reduced to 9.79s by Mr Green. In the same event, Surin recorded a mark of 9.84s, magnificent performance, but a year too late.

This politely begs the question, who is the fastest Canadian off all time, considering only the legal marks and excluding Ben Johnson ?The first step would be to substract the reaction times of both athletes to obtain the actual time in which someone was running. Bailey reacted 0.174s after the gun and Surin was quicker with 0.127s giving both athletes corrected times of 9.661s and 9.706s respectively.

Without delving into too much detail, which shall follow in some articles, the altitude and windspeed significantly affects the final recorded times. The last Olympics to be hosted at high altitude where the 1968 Mexico City Olympics, were a headache because of the added advantage presented by lower barometric pressure. Even though lower oxygen partial pressure reduces the maximum possible aerobic power, sprint races are almost anaerobic. Most sprinters take their first breath at the 30m mark and if generalized to one breath/step, there is still limited breathing as most sprinters require 48–49 steps to complete 100m. The reduction in aerodynamic drag has been modelled to span an advantage from as low as 0.05s to as high as 0.18s.

Lets take the modelled range into perspective. The longest standing 100m record was from 1968 to 1984, from Jim Hines to Calvin, progressing from 9.99s to 9.98s. The biggest progression in the 100m was not due to human physical prowess but computational advancement. Advancements in timing added 0.5s to the record, multiple times higher than 0.18s, the biggest contribution, by Usain Bolt.

Any mark that is written in green ink, for denoting World Record, is only legal if the windspeed is less than 2m/s in both directions with no consideration for lateral wind and below 1000m in altitude. Given such promiscous prerequisites, we are guaranteed to stumble into the problem posed above, who is the fastest Canadian of all time.If one were to develop a strategy of calculating the true speed of an athlete of specific dimensions at sea level, that should theoretically solve the problem right ?

Wind speed measurement at the Olympics is neither a science nor an art, its a true testament of the ignorance of humanity, so we will not tackle that. Measurement of air density and of the approximate surface area of an athlete exposed are really hard problems that have solutions that work in relevant fields. Each and every variable in the modelling equations involves some estimation and using formulas from a well cited and reviewed source as an example, the two corrected times for Bailey and Burin are 9.719s and 9.720s respectively. Bailey, as the formulas show, remains the Laison Al-Ghaib of the magnificent dash, as was and will always be as was confirmed by his placement as the first athlete in ranking and anchor of the Deadly Medley, that is, a medley of the fastest individuals in a given century.

There is a discrepancy of 0.001s, between the two times. Is one able to sleep, with the knowledge that, the difference between two individuals is 0.001s ? If one where in a dark room, say, in Berghain, with no light at all, wearing/not wearing leather, its optional, and someone flashed a really bright laser light, for 0.001s, do you reckon one would see the light ? What does it mean to be fast ?